Jaeger and Zipkin: Config & docs upgrade (#64250)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/datasources/jaeger/_index.md

Only users with the organization administrator role can add data sources.
Administrators can also [configure the data source via YAML]({{< relref "#provision-the-data-source" >}}) with Grafana's provisioning system.

> Once you've added the data source, you can [configure it]({{< relref "#configure-the-data-source" >}}) so that your Grafana instance's users can create queries in its [query editor]({{< relref "#query-the-data-source" >}}) when they [build dashboards]({{< relref "../../dashboards/build-dashboards/" >}}) and use [Explore]({{< relref "../../explore/" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've added the data source, you can [configure it]({{< relref "#configure-the-data-source" >}}) so your Grafana instance's users can create queries using the [query editor]({{< relref "#query-the-data-source" >}}) when [building dashboards]({{< relref "../../dashboards/build-dashboards/" >}}) and use [Explore]({{< relref "../../explore/" >}}).
```

| **User**       | Defines the user name for basic authentication.                          |
| **Password**   | Defines the password for basic authentication.                           |

You can also configure settings specific to the Jaeger data source. These options are described in the sections below.

### Trace to logs

![Trace to logs settings](/media/docs/tempo/tempo-trace-to-logs-9-4.png)

> **Note:** Available in Grafana v7.4 and higher.
> If you use Grafana Cloud, open a [support ticket in the Cloud Portal](/profile/org#support) to access this feature.

The **Trace to logs** setting configures the [trace to logs feature]({{< relref "../../explore/trace-integration" >}}) that is available when you integrate Grafana with Jaeger.

There are two ways to configure the trace to logs feature:

- Use a simplified configuration with default query, or
- Configure a custom query where you can use a [template language]({{< relref "../../dashboards/variables/variable-syntax">}}) to interpolate variables from the trace or span.

#### Use a simple configuration

1. Select the target data source.

> 1. Set start and end time shift. As the logs timestamps may not exactly match the timestamps of the spans in trace it may be necessary to search in larger or shifted time range to find the desired logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set start and end time shift. Since the logs timestamps may not exactly match the timestamps of the spans in trace, it may be necessary to search in larger or shifted time range to find the desired logs.
```

> 1. Select which tags to use in the logs query. The tags you configure must be present in the spans attributes or resources for a trace to logs span link to appear. You can optionally configure a new name for the tag. This is useful for example if the tag has dots in the name and the target data source does not allow using dots in labels. In that case you can for example remap `http.status` to `http_status`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select which tags to use in the logs query. The tags you configure must be present in the spans attributes or resources for a trace to logs span link to appear. You can optionally configure a new name for the tag. This is useful if the tag has dots in the name and the target data source does not allow dots in labels. In that case, you can, for example, remap `http.status` to `http_status`.
```

> 1. Optionally switch on the **Filter by trace ID** and/or **Filter by span ID** setting to further filter the logs if your logs consistently contain trace or span IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Optionally, switch on the **Filter by trace ID** and/or **Filter by span ID** setting to further filter the logs if your logs consistently contain trace or span IDs.
```

#### Configure a custom query

1. Select the target data source.

> 1. Set start and end time shift. As the logs timestamps may not exactly match the timestamps of the spans in the trace it may be necessary to widen or shift the time range to find the desired logs.
> 1. Optionally select tags to map. These tags can be used in the custom query with `${__tags}` variable. This variable will interpolate the mapped tags as list in an appropriate syntax for the data source and will only include the tags that were present in the span omitting those that weren't present. You can optionally configure a new name for the tag. This is useful in cases where the tag has dots in the name and the target data source does not allow using dots in labels. For example, you can remap `http.status` to `http_status` in such a case. If you don't map any tags here, you can still use any tag in the query like this `method="${__span.tags.method}"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set start and end time shift. Since  the logs timestamps may not exactly match the timestamps of the spans in the trace, you may need to widen or shift the time range to find the desired logs.
1. Optionally, select tags to map. These tags can be used in the custom query with `${__tags}` variable. This variable will interpolate the mapped tags as a list in an appropriate syntax for the data source and will only include the tags that were present in the span omitting those that weren't present. You can optionally configure a new name for the tag. This is useful in cases where the tag has dots in the name and the target data source does not allow dots in labels. For example, you can remap `http.status` to `http_status`.  If you don't map any tags here, you can still use any tag in the query like this `method="${__span.tags.method}"`.
```

1. Skip **Filter by trace ID** and **Filter by span ID** settings as these cannot be used with a custom query.
1. Switch on **Use custom query**.

> 1. Specify a custom query to be used to query the logs. You can use various variables to make that query relevant for current span. The link will only be shown only if all the variables are interpolated with non-empty values to prevent creating an invalid query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Specify a custom query to be used to query the logs. You can use various variables to make that query relevant for current span. The link shows only if all the variables are interpolated with non-empty values to prevent creating an invalid query.
```

#### Variables that can be used in a custom query

> To use a variable you need to wrap it in `${}`. For example `${__span.name}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a variable you need to wrap it in `${}`. For example: `${__span.name}`.
```

| **Use custom query**      | Toggles use of custom query with interpolation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| **Query**                 | Input to write custom query. Use variable interpolation to customize it with variables from span.                                                                                                                                                                            |

### Trace to metrics

> **Note:** This feature is behind the `traceToMetrics` [feature toggle]({{< relref "../../setup-grafana/configure-grafana#feature_toggles" >}}).
> If you use Grafana Cloud, open a [support ticket in the Cloud Portal](/profile/org#support) to access this feature.

The **Trace to metrics** section configures the [trace to metrics feature](/blog/2022/08/18/new-in-grafana-9.1-trace-to-metrics-allows-users-to-navigate-from-a-trace-span-to-a-selected-data-source/) available when integrating Grafana with Jaeger.

> **To configure trace to metrics:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure trace to metrics:
```

| **Service**      | Returns a list of services.                                                                                                       |
| **Operation**    | Populated when you select a service with related operations. Select `All` to query all operations.                                |
| **Tags**         | Sets tags with values in the [logfmt](https://brandur.org/logfmt) format, such as `error=true db.statement="select * from User"`. |
| **Min Duration** | Filters all traces with a duration higher than the set value. Possible values are `1.2s, 100ms, 500us`.                           |
| **Max Duration** | Filters all traces with a duration lower than the set value. Possible values are `1.2s, 100ms, 500us`.                            |
| **Limit**        | Limits the number of traces returned.                                                                                             |

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/explore/jaeger-search-form.png" class="docs-image--no-shadow" caption="Screenshot of the Jaeger query editor" >}}

### Query by trace ID

> **To query a particular trace:**

Reviewer: Bolding the sentence treats it as a heading, but it's not a heading, so I removed the bold here and in a few other places. 
```suggestion
To query a particular trace:
```
